INCITS/Fortran Meeting #236 Minutes

InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards (INCITS)
Secretariat: Information Technology Industry Council (ITI)
700 K Street NW, Suite 600, Washington, DC 20001
www.incits.org

Fortran-2025-00028-m236-draft-agenda.txt

June 23 - June 26, 2025, Berkeley, CA

Meeting #236 is a hybrid (mixed-mode) meeting:
in-person in Berkeley, CA with virtual option via Zoom

Teleconference details are provided in J3 forum for members:
https://j3-fortran.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=173


I. Monday, June 23, 2025 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
--------------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
      1. Visitor badge pick-up
   2. Opening Business - R. Budiardja (8:30AM)
      1. INCITS Code of Conduct
         1. http://www.incits.org/standards-information/policies
      2. INCITS Patent Policy and Antitrust
         1. http://www.incits.org/standards-information/legal-info
      3. Beginning membership report - L. Menard
         1. Reference 25-154.txt
      4. Beginning Treasurer's report -  J. Steidel
         1. Reference 25-152.txt
      5. Approval of draft agenda - R. Budiardja
         1. Reference document:  Fortran-2025-00028-m236-draft-agenda.txt
            1. Johnson/Steidel
            2. Unanimous Consent
      6. Approval of Meeting 235 minutes - R. Budiardja
         1. Reference document:  Fortran-2025-00027-m235-minutes.txt
            1. Menard/Steidel
            2. Unanimous Consent
   3. National Items
      0. The 202Y work plan has been updated and includes "level of work"
         recommended by UK and approved by INCITS/Fortran.
      1. Liaison reports
         1. INCITS report - R. Budiardja
            1. Request to identify 2 reps to be tapped as experts in
               various meetings.
               1. Reuben Budiardja
               2. Brad Richardson
         2. MPI Liaison report
            1. No representative at this time
         3. OpenMP Liaison report - B. Long
            1. 25-147.txt
         4. flang Liaison report - M. LeAir
            1. 25-151.txt
            2. From LLBL: SiPearl is working on lowering some multi-image
               parallel entities to PRIF, including:
               1. Coarray allocation and deallocation
               2. Coarray puts and gets
               3. Events, teams, locks
               4. Atomic and collective subroutines (except co_reduce)
               5. Synchronization statements
               6. ERROR_STOP and STOP
         5. OpenACC Liaison report - J. Larkin
            1. 25-146.txt
         6. fortran-lang/LFortran  - O. Certik
            1. Not present at this time
   4. Berkeley Local Arrangements - K. Rasmussen
   5. International Items - S. Lionel
      1. Nothing at this time
   6. Other Business - R. Budiardja
      1. Comments from members
      2. Tutorials (if needed)
      3. Subgroup Organization
         1. Generics
            1. Subgroup Head: Tom Clune
         2. Data
            1. Subgroup Head: Malcolm Cohen
         3. JoR
            1. Subgroup Head: Lorri Menard
         4. HPC
            1. Subgroup Head: Bill Long
         5. Edit
            1. Subgroup Head: Malcolm Cohen
         6. Interp
            1. Subgroup Head: Malcolm Cohen
         7. Asynchrony  (new)
            1. Subgroup Head: Soren Rasmussen
         8. Preprocessor (new)
            1. Subgroup Head: Dan Bonachea
   7. Subgroup Meetings
   8. Working Lunch - Topic Live agenda/ J3 Committee Guide Development
                      (12:00PM)
   9. Subgroup Meetings
  10. Subgroup Reports (4:30PM)
       1. Motion to have a preprocessor group spun from JoR
          1. Lionel/Rouson
          2. Unanimous Consent
          3. Included in Subgroup Organization above

++Discussion 25-142r1 "Formal specifications for the Fortran
                       preprocessor (FPP)"
       1. Led by preprocessor group

Meeting recessed 6:00PM



II. Tuesday, June 24, 2025 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Morning Plenary - subgroup heads (8:30AM)
/JoR
**Motion 25-143 "US19 Reqs/specs for additional IEEE-754 math functions"
                [Cook](Menard/Richardson)
     UC

++Discussion 25-145 "Requirements for US20: Local Prefix Operation
                     Intrinsics"

Straw Vote on approach:
A:  5 Y  10 N  8 U
B:  9 Y  7 N   7 U
C:  13Y  1 N   8 U

Straw vote on inclusive/exclusive attribute
Optional argument:  2
Part of name:      17
Undecided:          2

Should we generalize Identity as non-scalar
Keep ID as scalar    15
Generalize ID        0
Undecided:           6

Do we keep SEGMENT?
Yes         0
No          15
Undecided   7

/Preprocessor
++Discussion (cont) 25-142r1 "Formal specifications for the Fortran
                              preprocessor (FPP)"

   3. Tutorials (if needed)
   4. Open Discussion
   5. Subgroup Meetings
   6. Working Lunch - Topic  J3 Committee Guide Development (12:00PM)
   7. Subgroup Meetings
   8. Afternoon Plenary - subgroup heads (3:00PM)
/Generics
--Withdrawn 25-135 "Edits for templates: TEMPLATE" [Generics]
                    (Clune/Richardson)
   New version to be voted on tomorrow

--Withdrawn 25-136 "Edits for templates: deferred arguments"
                   [Generics](Clune/LeAir)
   New version to be voted on tomorrow

/Data
**Motion 25-115 "Specific versions of auto-generic subprograms" [Reid]
                (Cohen/Klimowicz)
   UC

++Discussion 25-121r3 "Corank and genericity" [Cohen]
The following are straw votes on the proposed requirements.
Should we limit our requirements to:
CR1         3
CR1-CR4     9
CR1-CR6     0
None        2
Undecided   6

The following are specific to CR7 and CR8:
Should we add a CORANK intrinsic     12 Y  3 N   5 U
Should we allow genericity on corank  4 Y  3 N  13 U

   Another document will formally request to ask WG5
to do CR1-CR4 plus CR7.

**Motion 25-153 "US08 Polymorphic PURE function results, edits"[Cohen]
                 (Cohen/Richardson)
  As amended. UC

   9. Subgroup Reports (4:45PM)
/JoR:
   1. For vote tomorrow AM
      1. 25-145r1
      2. 25-155
/preprocessor:
   1. For vote tomorrow AM
      1. 25-142r1 + at least some edits
/HPC:
   1. For vote tomorrow AM
      1. 25-127r1
      2. 25-144r1 (updated version with straw votes)
/Generics: For tomorrow PM
   1. For vote tomorrow PM
      1. 25-135r1
      2. 25-136r1
      3. 25-137r1
      4. 25-138
      5. 25-139
/Asynchrony:
   1. No business for tomorrow
/Data: For tomorrow PM
   1. For vote tomorrow PM
      1. 25-156
      2. 25-157
/Edit, Interp
   1. No business for tomorrow


III. Wednesday, June 25, 2025 -- 8:00AM - 5:00PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Morning Plenary - subgroup heads (8:30AM)
/JoR:
**Motion 25-145r1 "Requirements for US20: Local Prefix Operation
                   Intrinsics" [Cook,Bonachea](Menard/Maddhipatla)
   UC
--Withdrawn 25-155 "US11 - Provide intrinsics for source location"
                   [Menard](Menard/K.Rasmussen)


/Preprocessing:
**Motion 25-142r1 "Formal specifications for the Fortran preprocessor
                  (FPP)" [Klimowicz,Bonachea,Fasano,Lionel]
                  (Bonachea/Klimowicz)
   As amended  UC

/HPC:
**Motion 25-127r1 "Section 2, req from DIN1: Collectives over a specified
                   team" [Bader,Bonachea,HPC](Bonachea/Steidel)
   UC
**Motion 25-127r1 "Section 3, spec from DIN1: Collectives over a
                   specified team" [Bader,Bonachea,HPC](Bonachea/Steidel)
   UC
**Motion 25-127r1 "Section 4, syntax/semantics from DIN1: Collectives
                   over a specified team" [Bader,Bonachea,HPC]
                   (Bonachea/S.Rasmussen)
   UC
**Motion 25-127r1 "Section 5, edits from DIN1: Collectives over a
                   specified team, " [Bader,Bonachea,HPC]
                   (Bonachea/Steidel)
   UC
**Motion 25-144r1 "Requirements for US20 collective subroutines for
                   prefix operations"[Cook,Bonachea](Long/Clune)
   UC

   3. Tutorials (if needed)
   4. Open Discussion
   5. Subgroup Meetings
   6. Working Lunch - Topic "J3 Committee Guide Development"  (12:00PM)
   7. Subgroup Meetings
   8. Afternoon Plenary - subgroup heads (3:00PM)
/Generics:
**Motion 25-135r1 "Edits for templates: TEMPLATE" [Generics](Clune/LeAir)
   As amended UC

**Motion 25-136r1 "Edits for templates: deferred arguments" [Generics]
                  (Clune/Richardson)
   As amended

/Data:
++Discussion 25-156 "Edits for auto-generic subprograms" [Reid]
   Straw vote:
      1a Disallow * for intrinsic kinds  11
      1b Allow * for intrinsic kinds      2
      Undecided                           6

   Straw vote:
       In kind-generic declarations
       1.5a Require all kind values to be arrays            0
       1.5b Require at least one kind value to be an array 15
       Undecided                                            4


**Motion 25-157 "Corank and genericity" [Cohen](Cohen/LeAir)
   As amended UC

   8. Subgroup Reports (4:30pm)
/Asynchrony
   1. For discussion tomorrow
      1. 25-159r1
/Generics
   1. For discussion tomorrow
      1. 25-137r1
      2. 25-138
   2. For vote tomorrow
      1. 25-158
/JoR
   1. No business for tomorrow
/Preprocessor
   1. Nothing more this meeting
/HPC
   1. No business for tomorrow
/Data
   1. For discussion tomorrow
      1. The rest of the straw votes in 25-156
/Interp
   1. Report: Working on getting corrigendum ready
/Edit
   1. Report: Working to create 25-007r1 with edits from
      corrigendum and to resolve ligatures/

Recessed 5:30 PM

IV. Thursday, June 26, 2025 -- 8:00AM - 12:55PM PT (UTC-7)
----------------------------------------------------------
   1. Working Breakfast
   2. Morning Plenary - subgroup heads (8:30AM)
/Data
++Discussion (cont) 25-156 "Edits for auto-generic subprograms" [Reid]
 Straw Vote: Alternate 2, related to duplicate KIND values
     Duplicate kind values are ignored   15
     Kind values shall be distinct        0
     Undecided                            1

 Straw Vote: Similar to #2, but in generic-type-specifier
     Duplicate kind values are ignored   17
     Kind values shall be distinct        0
     Undecided                            0

 Straw vote: Alternate 4, related to duplicate ranks
     Duplicate ranks are ignored         11
     Ranks must be distinct               2
     Undecided                            4

 Straw vote: Similar to #4, but in generic-rank-list
     Duplicate values are an error         2
     Duplicate values are ignored         10
     Undecided                             5

   1. Paper will be amended, resubmitted

/Generics
**Motion 25-158 "Relitigating the Characters Selected to Bracket
                 Instantiation and Deferred Argument Lists" [Richardson]
                (Clune/Richardson)
   Straw vote:
     Parens with ^        0
     Curly braces         13
     Undecided            5
   As amended, proposing to change syntax.  UC in room

/Interp
--Deferred 25-160 "Interp on CHANGE TEAM construct"[Cohen]
  1. Deferred for next meeting because not enough time for
     adequate reading

/Asynchrony
++Discussion 25-159r1 Requirements for asynchronous tasks
     Almost like a tutorial

/Generics, for discussions
++Discussion 25-137r1, "Edits for TEMPLATES: Instantiation" [Generics]
   More work happening
++Discussion 25-138, "Edits for TEMPLATES: REQUIREMENT and REQUIRE"
                     [Generics]
 Straw vote:
   Should the optional :: be removed?
     Yes, remove it        0
     No, keep it          12
     Undecided             4

   3. Working Lunch - Topic "Fortran eco-system, and how to get people
                      involved" (12:00PM)
   4. Closing Business (12:45PM)
      1. Future meetings - R. Budiardja
         1. October 2025 virtual 6PM - 9PM Eastern Time
            1. October 13, 15, 22, 27 and 29
            2. Note: Three elapsed weeks to allow better reviews
         2. February 2026 - Three options, to be decided in October
            1. Virtual, 6PM - 9PM Eastern Time
               1. February 9, 11, 18, 23, 25
            2. Virtual, 6PM - 9PM Eastern Time
               1. February 17, 19, 23, 25, 26
            3. In person, possibly Berkeley CA
               1. February 23 - 27, 8AM - 5PM Pacific Time
      2. Ending Treasurer's report -  J. Steidel
      3. Closing membership report - L. Menard
         1. 25-154r1.txt
         2. All member organizations were represented here this meeting
   5. Comments from Members

   6. Meeting Closed (12:55PM)


++++++ Not addressed this meeting:
25-156r1 "Edits for auto-generic subprograms"
   1. Listed as Info, not voted in m235
25-160 "Interp on CHANGE TEAM construct"
   1. Already in m236
+++++++++
